src/main/resources/content/articles/2024/access-control-in-java.adoc, before:

= Understanding access control in Java
Asiel Leal_Celdeiro
2024-03-15
:docinfo: shared-footer
:icons: font
:toc-title: In this article
:toc: left
:jbake-document_info: shared-footer
:jbake-table_of_content: left
:jbake-fontawesome: true
:jbake-type: post
:jbake-status: draft
:jbake-tags: java, java-access-control
:jbake-summary: The access control mechanisms in Java allow us to have a more secure way of building our \
applications, libraries, and code in general. It's also an effective way to implement encapsulation and have more \
reliable code.
:jbake-og_img: articles/2024/images/03/access-control-in-java_social.webp
:jbake-image_src: articles/2024/images/03/access-control-in-java.webp
:jbake-image_alt: Image of a vault
:jbake-og_author: Asiel Leal Celdeiro
:jbake-author_handle: lealceldeiro
:jbake-author_profile_image: /img/author/lealceldeiro.webp

The access control mechanisms in Java allow us to have a more secure way of building our applications, libraries,
and code in general.
In this article, you'll learn what are the access controls implemented by the Java platform,
how to use them and have a better picture of how they work in general.

== What's "access control" in Java?

Access control refers to the mechanisms defined by Java
to guarantee that packages, classes, etc. are accessible only to those entities
which have the correct permissions
and not to others which are not entitled to access them.

This sometimes can be seen as a restrictive behavior, but it's more than that:
it shields users of a class or package from depending on specific implementation details that are irrelevant to them
and that could potentially break their code if such details are changed.

In short, if access to an entity is permitted, that entity is said to be _accessible_.

== How's accessibility to an entity determined?

=== Top level classes

==== `public`

If a top level class or interface is declared `public`,
then it may be accessed by any code declared within the same module.

On top of that, if such a class or interface is a member of a package that is exported by its module,
then it'll also be accessible by code located in another module to which the package is exported,
as long as the https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se21/html/jls-7.html#jls-7.3[compilation unit^]
in which the class or interfaces is declared is visible to that other module
(https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se21/html/jls-6.html#jls-6.6.1[§6.6.1^]).

In contrast, if the class or interface is part of a module that's not exported, it'll be accessible only by code
located in the same module.

==== package access

When a top level class or interface is declared as "package private" it'll be accessible only from code located within
the same package.

NOTE: _package access_ is the implicit (default) access given when no modifier (`public` or `private`) is specified.

=== Members and constructors

A member (class, interface, field, or method) of a
class, interface, type parameter, or reference type, or a constructor of a class,
is accessible only if (https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se21/html/jls-6.html#jls-6.6.1[§6.6.1^]):

- the class, interface, type parameter, or reference type is accessible, and
- the member or constructor is declared to permit access:
  . If the member of constructor is declared `public`, then access is permitted
  . Otherwise, if the member or constructor is declared `protected`,
    then access is permitted only when:
    * the access occurs from
      within the package containing the class in which the protected member or constructor is declared
    * or, the code that tries to access the protected member or constructor of an object
      is responsible for the implementation of that object
      (https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se21/html/jls-6.html#jls-6.6.2[§6.6.2^]).
  . Otherwise, if  the member or constructor is declared with package access,
    then access is permitted only when
    the access occurs from
    within the package in which the class, interface, type parameter, or reference type is declared.
  . Otherwise, when the member or constructor is declared `private`,
    then access is permitted only when:
    * the access occurs from within the body of the top level class or interface that encloses the declaration of
      the member or constructor
    * or, the access occurs in the `permits` clause of the top level class or interface that enclose the declaration of
      the member
    * or, the access occurs in the
      https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se21/html/jls-8.html#jls-8.10.1[record component list^]
      of the top level record class that encloses the declaration of the member

TIP: All members of interfaces lacking access modifiers are implicitly `public`.

=== Array types

An array type is accessible if, and only if, its element type is accessible.

== Wrap up

=== Compilation units located in different modules

When two compilation units (source files), let's say class `A` and `B` are located in different modules,
let's say `moduleA` and `moduleB` respectively,
if class `A` is exported by `moduleA` to `moduleB`,
then class `A` and its members and constructor(s) might be accessible to class `B`,
following the previously explained rules and summarized in the
<<compilation_units_within_the_same_module_or_exported_to_another_modules,next section>>.

Otherwise, if class `A` is not exported from `moduleA` to `moduleB`,
it won't be accessible by class `B`, regardless of the access modifier specified (and the next section doesn't apply),
period.

[#compilation_units_within_the_same_module_or_exported_to_another_modules]
=== Compilation units within the same module or exported to another module(s)

Given we have some compilation units (source files) accessible to one another,
from a module visibility point of view, then we can summarize their accessibility as follows.

In the next two tables, you can see, respectively,
the different access levels for top level classes, and for members and constructor.
If you're just starting to learn or practice this content, it may be useful to keep them at hand—kind of cheat sheet.
However, make sure you understand all the details and nuances previously explained and, ideally, the content from the
linked resources.

.Access levels for top level classes, interfaces, etc. `√` means accessible, blank means not accessible
[%autowidth]
|===
| |Type (class, interface, etc.) |Unrelated type within the package containing the accessed type |Subtype in the same package |Subtype in a different package | Any other code that tries to access it

|`public`
|`√`
|`√`
|`√`
|`√`
|`√`

|_package private_
|`√`
|`√`
|`√`
|
|
|===

NOTE: As you may have already noticed, we can't declare a top level class, interface, etc. as `private` or `protected`,
otherwise the code won't compile.

.Access levels for members and constructors. `√` means accessible, blank means not accessible
[%autowidth]
|===
| |Enclosing type (class/interface, etc.) |Unrelated type within the package containing the enclosing type |Subtype in the same package |Subtype in a different package | Any other code that tries to access it

|`public`
|`√`
|`√`
|`√`
|`√`
|`√`

|`protected`
|`√`
|`√`
|`√`
|`√`
|

|_package private_
|`√`
|`√`
|`√`
|
|

|`private`
|`√`
|
|
|
|
|===

Commit message:

article: Finish article access-control-in-java.adoc
- Set publish date, update tags
- Add some minor improvements

src/main/resources/content/articles/2024/access-control-in-java.adoc, after:

= Understanding access control in Java
Asiel Leal_Celdeiro
2024-04-17
:docinfo: shared-footer
:icons: font
:toc-title: In this article
:toc: left
:jbake-document_info: shared-footer
:jbake-table_of_content: left
:jbake-fontawesome: true
:jbake-type: post
:jbake-status: published-date
:jbake-tags: java, java-access-control, access-modifiers
:jbake-summary: The access control mechanisms in Java allow us to have a more secure way of building our \
applications, libraries, and code in general. It's also an effective way to implement encapsulation and have more \
reliable code.
:jbake-og_img: articles/2024/images/03/access-control-in-java_social.webp
:jbake-image_src: articles/2024/images/03/access-control-in-java.webp
:jbake-image_alt: Image of a vault
:jbake-og_author: Asiel Leal Celdeiro
:jbake-author_handle: lealceldeiro
:jbake-author_profile_image: /img/author/lealceldeiro.webp

The access control mechanisms in Java allow us to have a more secure way of building our applications, libraries,
and code in general.
In this article, you'll learn what are the access controls implemented by the Java platform,
how to use them and have a better picture of how they work in general.

== What's "access control" in Java?

Access control refers to the mechanisms defined by Java
to guarantee that packages, classes, etc. are accessible only to those entities
which have the correct permissions
and not to others which are not entitled to access them.

This sometimes can be seen as a restrictive behavior, but it's more than that:
it shields users of a class or package from depending on specific implementation details that are irrelevant to them
and that could potentially break their code if such details are changed.

In short, if access to an entity is permitted, that entity is said to be _accessible_.

== How's accessibility to an entity determined?

=== Top level classes

Top level class can be declared only either `public` or _package private_, any other attempt to specify an access
modifier would result in a compilation error.

==== Public classes

Let's start with the most permissive one.
If a top level class or interface is declared `public`,
then it may be accessed by any code declared within the same module.

On top of that, if such a class or interface is a member of a package that is exported by its module,
then it'll also be accessible by code located in another module to which the package is exported,
as long as the https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se21/html/jls-7.html#jls-7.3[compilation unit^]
in which the class or interfaces is declared is visible to that other module
(https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se21/html/jls-6.html#jls-6.6.1[§6.6.1^]).

In contrast, if the class or interface is part of a module that's not exported, it'll be accessible only by code
located in the same module.

==== package access

When a top level class or interface is declared as "package private" it'll be accessible only from code located within
the same package.

NOTE: _package access_ is the implicit (default) access given when no modifier (`public` or `private`) is specified.

=== Members and constructors

A member (class, interface, field, or method) of a
class, interface, type parameter, or reference type, or a constructor of a class,
is accessible only if (https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se21/html/jls-6.html#jls-6.6.1[§6.6.1^]):

- the class, interface, type parameter, or reference type is accessible, and
- the member or constructor is declared to permit access:
  . If the member of constructor is declared `public`, then access is permitted
  . Otherwise, if the member or constructor is declared `protected`,
    then access is permitted only when:
    * the access occurs from
      within the package containing the class in which the protected member or constructor is declared
    * or, the code that tries to access the protected member or constructor of an object
      is responsible for the implementation of that object
      (https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se21/html/jls-6.html#jls-6.6.2[§6.6.2^]).
  . Otherwise, if  the member or constructor is declared with package access,
    then access is permitted only when
    the access occurs from
    within the package in which the class, interface, type parameter, or reference type is declared.
  . Otherwise, when the member or constructor is declared `private`,
    then access is permitted only when:
    * the access occurs from within the body of the top level class or interface that encloses the declaration of
      the member or constructor
    * or, the access occurs in the `permits` clause of the top level class or interface that enclose the declaration of
      the member
    * or, the access occurs in the
      https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se21/html/jls-8.html#jls-8.10.1[record component list^]
      of the top level record class that encloses the declaration of the member

TIP: All members of interfaces lacking access modifiers are implicitly `public`.

=== Array types

An array type is accessible if, and only if, its element type is accessible.

== Wrap up

=== Compilation units located in different modules

When two compilation units (source files), let's say class `A` and `B` are located in different modules,
let's say `moduleA` and `moduleB` respectively,
if class `A` is exported by `moduleA` to `moduleB`,
then class `A` and its members and constructor(s) might be accessible to class `B`,
following the previously explained rules and summarized in the
<<compilation_units_within_the_same_module_or_exported_to_another_modules,next section>>.

Otherwise, if class `A` is not exported from `moduleA` to `moduleB`,
it won't be accessible by class `B`, regardless of the access modifier specified (and the next section doesn't apply),
period.

[#compilation_units_within_the_same_module_or_exported_to_another_modules]
=== Compilation units within the same module or exported to another module(s)

Given we have some compilation units (source files) accessible to one another,
from a module visibility point of view, then we can summarize their accessibility as follows.

In the next two tables, you can see, respectively,
the different access levels for top level classes, and for members and constructor.
If you're just starting to learn or practice this content, it may be useful to keep them at hand—kind of cheat sheet.
However, make sure you understand all the details and nuances previously explained and, ideally, the content from the
linked resources.

.Access levels for top level classes, interfaces, etc. `√` means accessible, blank means not accessible
[%autowidth]
|===
| |Type (class, interface, etc.) |Unrelated type within the package containing the accessed type |Subtype in the same package |Subtype in a different package | Any other code that tries to access it

|`public`
|`√`
|`√`
|`√`
|`√`
|`√`

|_package private_
|`√`
|`√`
|`√`
|
|
|===

WARNING: Remember, we can't declare a top level class, interface, etc. as `private` or `protected`,
otherwise the code won't compile.

.Access levels for members and constructors. `√` means accessible, blank means not accessible
[%autowidth]
|===
| |Enclosing type (class/interface, etc.) |Unrelated type within the package containing the enclosing type |Subtype in the same package |Subtype in a different package | Any other code that tries to access it

|`public`
|`√`
|`√`
|`√`
|`√`
|`√`

|`protected`
|`√`
|`√`
|`√`
|`√`
|

|_package private_
|`√`
|`√`
|`√`
|
|

|`private`
|`√`
|
|
|
|
|===
