src/main/resources/content/articles/2024/kanban.adoc, before:

= Quick introduction to Kanban
Asiel Leal_Celdeiro
2024-04-10
:docinfo: shared-footer
:icons: font
:toc-title: In this article
:toc: left
:jbake-document_info: shared-footer
:jbake-table_of_content: left
:jbake-fontawesome: true
:jbake-type: post
:jbake-status: draft
:jbake-tags: kanban, agile, methodologies
:jbake-summary: .
:jbake-og_img: articles/2024/images/04/kanban_social.webp
:jbake-image_src: articles/2024/images/04/kanban.webp
:jbake-image_alt: Image of : todo
:jbake-og_author: Asiel Leal Celdeiro
:jbake-author_handle: lealceldeiro
:jbake-author_profile_image: /img/author/lealceldeiro.webp

Kanban is a tool that aims to improve efficiency by reducing waste of time and doing things more efficiently.
In this article, you'll see a quick introduction to this tool, what it is, how to use it,
and whether it can be applied and how to your work process. The views and knowledge expressed here are those from
 the perspective of a software developer—not an expert in agile methodologies.

== Getting started

No matter what business we're in, we're always finding ways to make things more efficiently.
Lean methodologies were introduced with the purpose of making our business processes more efficiently.
They were born in manufacturing environments but can be applied to almost any kind of business activity or process.

They can be seen as a set of tools that can be adapted or modified to any environment,
according to the problem being solved.

One of these tools is Kanban.

== What is Kanban?

In every business, there's always a desired result that's preceded by a series of steps or tasks.
These steps or tasks almost always carry some form of result, let it be a document, a piece of information,
or any other output that is also used as the input for another step or task.

Not having these results (and on time) can cause delays for the final customer and, consequently, lost in our business.
On the flip side, having too many results (documents, deliverables, etc.) can become cumbersome to manage and can
also have the same undesired effects.

This is where Kanban comes in: it helps us in learning and managing an optimal flow of work within the process.

Some basic rules to implement Kanban are:

. Visualize the workflow: A visual representation of the workflow lets us see how tasks move from being "not done" to
"done right".
. Limit work in process/progress (WIP):
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hGJpez7rvc0[Get more done by doing less^] (at the same time). There's a limit in the
tasks we can do at the same time, going beyond that limit will only decrease our productivity. This is the same
principle we apply in programming: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Divide-and-conquer_algorithm[divide and conquer^]:
we should decompose "bigger" tasks into smaller ones, and do them one at the time to get them done correctly.
Kanban metrics allow us to find that "optimal" number.
. Measure and improve the flow: Improvements should always be a result of decisions made in an informed way. Kanban
is no different. In order for us to improve those areas where we're not being as productive as possible, we need to
first measure the steps, tasks. How much is this task taking and why? How much did we take to release feature XYZ?
How many hours did we spend in the analysis of feature ABC? Finding a good tool that allows us to measure our
tasks/steps properly is very important to enhance our processes. Some examples are
https://kanbantool.com/[Kanbantool^] and https://www.atlassian.com/software/jira/features/kanban-boards[Jira^].

== Using Kanban

== How to get started with it

== Other considerations

Commit message:

article: Add article content: Kanban

src/main/resources/content/articles/2024/kanban.adoc, after:

= Quick introduction to Kanban
Asiel Leal_Celdeiro
2024-04-10
:docinfo: shared-footer
:icons: font
:toc-title: In this article
:toc: left
:jbake-document_info: shared-footer
:jbake-table_of_content: left
:jbake-fontawesome: true
:jbake-type: post
:jbake-status: draft
:jbake-tags: kanban, agile, methodologies
:jbake-summary: .
:jbake-og_img: articles/2024/images/04/kanban_social.webp
:jbake-image_src: articles/2024/images/04/kanban.webp
:jbake-image_alt: Image of : todo
:jbake-og_author: Asiel Leal Celdeiro
:jbake-author_handle: lealceldeiro
:jbake-author_profile_image: /img/author/lealceldeiro.webp

Kanban is a tool that aims to improve efficiency by reducing waste of time and doing things more efficiently.
In this article, you'll see a quick introduction to this tool, what it is, how to use it,
and whether it can be applied and how to your work process. The views and knowledge expressed here are those from
 the perspective of a software developer—not an expert in agile methodologies.

== Getting started

No matter what business we're in, we're always finding ways to make things more efficiently.
Lean methodologies were introduced with the purpose of making our business processes more efficiently.
They were born in manufacturing environments but can be applied to almost any kind of business activity or process.

They can be seen as a set of tools that can be adapted or modified to any environment,
according to the problem being solved.

One of these tools is Kanban.

== What is Kanban?

In every business, there's always a desired result that's preceded by a series of steps or tasks.
These steps or tasks almost always carry some form of result, let it be a document, a piece of information,
or any other output that is also used as the input for another step or task.

Not having these results (and on time) can cause delays for the final customer and, consequently, lost in our business.
On the flip side, having too many results (documents, deliverables, etc.) can become cumbersome to manage and can
also have the same undesired effects.

This is where Kanban comes in: it helps us in learning and managing an optimal flow of work within the process.

Some basic rules to implement Kanban are:

. Visualize the workflow: A visual representation of the workflow lets us see how tasks move from being "not done" to
"done right".
. Limit work in process/progress (WIP):
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hGJpez7rvc0[Get more done by doing less^] (at the same time). There's a limit in the
tasks we can do at the same time, going beyond that limit will only decrease our productivity. This is the same
principle we apply in programming: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Divide-and-conquer_algorithm[divide and conquer^]:
we should decompose "bigger" tasks into smaller ones, and do them one at the time to get them done correctly.
Kanban metrics allow us to find that "optimal" number.
. Measure and improve the flow: Improvements should always be a result of decisions made in an informed way. Kanban
is no different. In order for us to improve those areas where we're not being as productive as possible, we need to
first measure the steps, tasks. How much is this task taking and why? How much did we take to release feature XYZ?
How many hours did we spend in the analysis of feature ABC? Finding a good tool that allows us to measure our
tasks/steps properly is very important to enhance our processes. Some examples are
https://kanbantool.com/[Kanbantool^] and https://www.atlassian.com/software/jira/features/kanban-boards[Jira^].

One good thing about Kanban is that we don't have to change what we may already be doing in our business.
We simply adapt the Kanban tool to our processes, to start measuring, adjusting and optimizing our tasks for
maximum efficiency.

Put in another way: we use Kanban in our existing business to identify ways to improve our already existing processes;
we don't need to change our process at once and "implement Kanban—"we don't lose the good things we're doing already.

== Using Kanban

== How to get started with it

== Other considerations
