src/main/resources/content/articles/2024/the-static-keyword-in-java.adoc, before:

= Everything you need to know about the static keyword in Java
Asiel Leal_Celdeiro
2024-02-23
:docinfo: shared-footer
:icons: font
:toc-title: In this article
:toc: left
:jbake-document_info: shared-footer
:jbake-table_of_content: left
:jbake-fontawesome: true
:jbake-type: post
:jbake-status: draft
:jbake-tags: java, java-classes, java-methods, access-modifiers, static
:jbake-summary: static is a keyword in Java that allows us to ...
:jbake-og_img: articles/2024/images/02/the-static-kyword-in-java_social.webp
:jbake-image_src: articles/2024/images/02/the-static-kyword-in-java.webp
:jbake-image_alt: Image of a lighthouse
:jbake-og_author: Asiel Leal Celdeiro
:jbake-author_handle: lealceldeiro
:jbake-author_profile_image: /img/author/lealceldeiro.webp

The `static` keyword in Java ...

== What's the `static` keyword in Java?

[quote,Oxford English Dictionary]
____
*static*

[Computing] (of a process or variable) not able to be changed during a set period,
for example, while a program is running.
____

That's how the Oxford English Dictionary defines _static_ as a word in the field of computing.
_Not able to change;_ that's the most important part.

Ok, we didn't have to check the dictionary to know that: when something is static, it doesn't change.
For example, a https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lighthouse[lighthouse^] is static in the sense that it doesn't move
from one place to another, like animals do.
Although the lantern(s) and related components move, the tower structure _doesn't change its position_ on the soil.

How much does this meaning relate to the `static` keyword in Java?

Very much!

The `static` keyword in Java can be used to modify the definition of
link:/articles/2024/java-oop-classes-and-objects.html#what-are-java-classes[classes^],
link:/articles/2024/java-oop-classes-and-objects.html#fields[fields^],
link:/articles/2024/java-oop-classes-and-objects.html#methods[methods^],
initializers and more.
It's always used to reflect a sense of _not changing its [the component's] behavior_ depending on other factors,
such as an object state.

Let's see some use cases along with some meaningful examples.

== Use cases for the `static` keyword

=== Static classes and interfaces

As we link:/articles/2024/java-oop-classes-and-objects.html#nested-classes[saw previously^],
we can declare inner classes and interfaces, that's it, classes and interfaces as members of
other classes and interfaces.
For example:

[source,java]
----
class A {
    class B {
    }
}
----

In the previous code, `B` is an inner class.
It's a member of `A` (see https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/javaOO/nested.html[tutorial^] for a full example).
This is a code smell, because to create an instance of `B`, we must create first an instance of `A`:

[source,java]
----
var a = new A();
var b = a.new B();
----

or the shorter version:

[source,java]
----
var b = new A().new B();
----

That code is almost never correct or justified. Just to mention some of its many flaws, we can say:

- To create an instance of `B`, we must allocate first memory to create an instance of `A`.
- If a declaration of some type (i.e.: a member variable) in a particular scope (i.e.: the inner class)
has the same name as another declaration in the enclosing scope,
then the declaration shadows the declaration of the enclosing scope.

In such cases, the correct approach is to declare a static nested class or interface
(https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se21/html/jls-8.html#jls-8.1.1.4[&sect;8.1.1.4^],
https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se21/html/jls-9.html#jls-9.1.1.3[&sect;9.1.1.3^]):

[source,java]
----
class A {
    static class B {
    }
}
----

Now `B` no longer "lives within" `A`, and we can simply use it like this:

[source,java]
----
var b = new A.B();
----

[IMPORTANT]
====
Notice we can't use `static` as a class or interface modifier
if the class or interface is not a member of another class or interface.

For example, in the previous code snippet, we can't declare the class `A` as `static` or it causes a compilation error.
====

=== Static fields

In a previous article, we saw how to declare link:/articles/2024/java-oop-classes-and-objects.html#fields[fields^].
To make them _static_ we just need to add the `static` modifier.
Let's see an example:

[source,java]
----
class Payment {
    static int MAX = 1000;
}
----

In the previous snippet, `MAX` is a static field.
This means it's not related to any specific instance of `Payment`.
Instead, it is associated with the class where it's declared.

For example, assuming `Payment` is located in the same package the following `Main` class is located,
then the `MAX` field could be used like this:

[source,java]
----
public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println(Payment.MAX);
    }
}
----

Notice here, how we didn't have to link:/articles/2024/java-oop-classes-and-objects.html#constructors[instantiate^]
`Payment` to access the static field.

[TIP]
====
If we use an object of type `Payment` to access the static field,
Java ignores the object and accesses the static field through the class,
that's it, the instance of the class is only used to know what's the type that declares the field.

A long time ago, I answered a https://stackoverflow.com/a/43126188/5640649[question on StackOverflow^]
where the original poster asked about this, and, despite I learned about it at the time, 6 years later it came back
to bite me in a job interview.

When I was asked what the following code would print/do, I hesitated to answer correctly and without any doubts:

[source,java]
----
class Order {
    static int basicPackage = 1;
}

public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Order order = new Order();
        System.out.println(order.basicPackage); // prints 1

        order = null;
        System.out.println(order.basicPackage); // prints 1 too
    }
}
----

I hope you came to the conclusion it prints `1` twice because the object `order` is only used in this context by Java
to know that this object is of type `Order` and get the value of the static field from the type itself,
instead of getting it from the instance.
====


The declaration of a static field (also known as _class variable_) introduces a static context,
which limits the use of constructs that refer to the current object
(https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se21/html/jls-8.html#jls-8.3.1.1[&sect;8.3.1.1^]).
For example, a static field can't be accessed from an instance method, or the `this` or `super` keywords.

=== Static methods

Static methods, just like static fields, are regular
link:/articles/2024/java-oop-classes-and-objects.html#methods[methods^] to which the `static` modifier
have been applied to.
Let's build on top of our previous example:

[source,java]
----
class Payment {
    static int MAX = 1000;

    static boolean isValidTransactionAmount(int amount) {
        return amount > 0 && amount <= MAX;
    }
}
----

Here we've declared a method `isValidTransactionAmount` which is static,
that's it, we don't need an object of type `Payment` to use it.
For example, this is how we'd call it:

[source,java]
----
public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println(Payment.isValidTransactionAmount(20));   // prints true
    }
}
----

Again, static methods involve a static context
from where we don't have access to constructs that refer to the current object,
such as instance fields, the `this` keyword, or the `super` keyword.
That's only expected.

Static fields and methods are constructed when the class is initialized,
not when class instances are constructed, so there's no way to access those instance constructs.

=== Static initializers

Static initializers are almost the same as instance initializers from a syntax perspective.
For example, building on top of the previous example, we could initialize the `MAX` variable like this:

[source,java]
----
class Payment {
    static int MAX;

    static {
        MAX = 1000;
    }
}
----

This construct is useful when the initialization of a static variable is not simple enough to fit in one line.
In this example, it's not worth it, but there are real-world scenarios where there's some complex logic we want to
execute when the class is constructed.

However, this construct should be used carefully because sometimes it's not easy to reason about the logic being
implemented.
That's because the field declaration and the actual initialization are separated.

The same rules about accessing constructs that refer to the current object apply here.

Additionally, there are a few notes we should remember about static initializers
(https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se21/html/jls-8.html#jls-8.7[&sect;8.7^]):

. It's a compile-time error if a static initializer can't complete normally.
. It's a compile-time error if a `return` statement appears anywhere within a static initializer.
. For more complex use cases, there are also some exhaustive
https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se21/html/jls-8.html#jls-8.3.3[definitions^] that you should be aware of.

=== Static imports

Static imports are used to import static-accessible members from other types, such as classes,
into a given type, for example, another class.

It works by specifying the `static` keyword after the `import` keyword.
For example, let's suppose we have the following `Payment` class, located in a package named `com.payment`.

[source,java]
----
package com.payment;

public class Payment {
    public static int MAX = 1000;
}
----

If we have another class called `Service` in a package called `com.services` and we want to import statically,
the `MAX` static field from `Payment`, we could do so like this:

[source,java]
----
package com.services;

import static com.payment.Payment.MAX;

class Service {
    static {
        System.out.println(MAX);
    }
}
----

It also works for the wildcard (`*`) import. This one would import _all_ static members of `Payment`.

[source,java]
----
import static com.payment.Payment.*;
----

The alternative to this import is the regular import:

[source,java]
----
package com.services;

import com.payment.Payment;

class Service {
    static {
        System.out.println(Payment.MAX);
    }
}
----

== Final thoughts

Commit message:

article: Update draft the-static-keyword-in-java.adoc
- Add content for final thoughts
- [skip-ci]

src/main/resources/content/articles/2024/the-static-keyword-in-java.adoc, after:

= Everything you need to know about the static keyword in Java
Asiel Leal_Celdeiro
2024-02-23
:docinfo: shared-footer
:icons: font
:toc-title: In this article
:toc: left
:jbake-document_info: shared-footer
:jbake-table_of_content: left
:jbake-fontawesome: true
:jbake-type: post
:jbake-status: draft
:jbake-tags: java, java-classes, java-methods, access-modifiers, static
:jbake-summary: static is a keyword in Java that allows us to ...
:jbake-og_img: articles/2024/images/02/the-static-kyword-in-java_social.webp
:jbake-image_src: articles/2024/images/02/the-static-kyword-in-java.webp
:jbake-image_alt: Image of a lighthouse
:jbake-og_author: Asiel Leal Celdeiro
:jbake-author_handle: lealceldeiro
:jbake-author_profile_image: /img/author/lealceldeiro.webp

The `static` keyword in Java ...

== What's the `static` keyword in Java?

[quote,Oxford English Dictionary]
____
*static*

[Computing] (of a process or variable) not able to be changed during a set period,
for example, while a program is running.
____

That's how the Oxford English Dictionary defines _static_ as a word in the field of computing.
_Not able to change;_ that's the most important part.

Ok, we didn't have to check the dictionary to know that: when something is static, it doesn't change.
For example, a https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lighthouse[lighthouse^] is static in the sense that it doesn't move
from one place to another, like animals do.
Although the lantern(s) and related components move, the tower structure _doesn't change its position_ on the soil.

How much does this meaning relate to the `static` keyword in Java?

Very much!

The `static` keyword in Java can be used to modify the definition of
link:/articles/2024/java-oop-classes-and-objects.html#what-are-java-classes[classes^],
link:/articles/2024/java-oop-classes-and-objects.html#fields[fields^],
link:/articles/2024/java-oop-classes-and-objects.html#methods[methods^],
initializers and more.
It's always used to reflect a sense of _not changing its [the component's] behavior_ depending on other factors,
such as an object state.

Let's see some use cases along with some meaningful examples.

== Use cases for the `static` keyword

=== Static classes and interfaces

As we link:/articles/2024/java-oop-classes-and-objects.html#nested-classes[saw previously^],
we can declare inner classes and interfaces, that's it, classes and interfaces as members of
other classes and interfaces.
For example:

[source,java]
----
class A {
    class B {
    }
}
----

In the previous code, `B` is an inner class.
It's a member of `A` (see https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/javaOO/nested.html[tutorial^] for a full example).
This is a code smell, because to create an instance of `B`, we must create first an instance of `A`:

[source,java]
----
var a = new A();
var b = a.new B();
----

or the shorter version:

[source,java]
----
var b = new A().new B();
----

That code is almost never correct or justified. Just to mention some of its many flaws, we can say:

- To create an instance of `B`, we must allocate first memory to create an instance of `A`.
- If a declaration of some type (i.e.: a member variable) in a particular scope (i.e.: the inner class)
has the same name as another declaration in the enclosing scope,
then the declaration shadows the declaration of the enclosing scope.

In such cases, the correct approach is to declare a static nested class or interface
(https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se21/html/jls-8.html#jls-8.1.1.4[&sect;8.1.1.4^],
https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se21/html/jls-9.html#jls-9.1.1.3[&sect;9.1.1.3^]):

[source,java]
----
class A {
    static class B {
    }
}
----

Now `B` no longer "lives within" `A`, and we can simply use it like this:

[source,java]
----
var b = new A.B();
----

[IMPORTANT]
====
Notice we can't use `static` as a class or interface modifier
if the class or interface is not a member of another class or interface.

For example, in the previous code snippet, we can't declare the class `A` as `static` or it causes a compilation error.
====

=== Static fields

In a previous article, we saw how to declare link:/articles/2024/java-oop-classes-and-objects.html#fields[fields^].
To make them _static_ we just need to add the `static` modifier.
Let's see an example:

[source,java]
----
class Payment {
    static int MAX = 1000;
}
----

In the previous snippet, `MAX` is a static field.
This means it's not related to any specific instance of `Payment`.
Instead, it is associated with the class where it's declared.

For example, assuming `Payment` is located in the same package the following `Main` class is located,
then the `MAX` field could be used like this:

[source,java]
----
public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println(Payment.MAX);
    }
}
----

Notice here, how we didn't have to link:/articles/2024/java-oop-classes-and-objects.html#constructors[instantiate^]
`Payment` to access the static field.

[TIP]
====
If we use an object of type `Payment` to access the static field,
Java ignores the object and accesses the static field through the class,
that's it, the instance of the class is only used to know what's the type that declares the field.

A long time ago, I answered a https://stackoverflow.com/a/43126188/5640649[question on StackOverflow^]
where the original poster asked about this, and, despite I learned about it at the time, 6 years later it came back
to bite me in a job interview.

When I was asked what the following code would print/do, I hesitated to answer correctly and without any doubts:

[source,java]
----
class Order {
    static int basicPackage = 1;
}

public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Order order = new Order();
        System.out.println(order.basicPackage); // prints 1

        order = null;
        System.out.println(order.basicPackage); // prints 1 too
    }
}
----

I hope you came to the conclusion it prints `1` twice because the object `order` is only used in this context by Java
to know that this object is of type `Order` and get the value of the static field from the type itself,
instead of getting it from the instance.
====


The declaration of a static field (also known as _class variable_) introduces a static context,
which limits the use of constructs that refer to the current object
(https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se21/html/jls-8.html#jls-8.3.1.1[&sect;8.3.1.1^]).
For example, a static field can't be accessed from an instance method, or the `this` or `super` keywords.

=== Static methods

Static methods, just like static fields, are regular
link:/articles/2024/java-oop-classes-and-objects.html#methods[methods^] to which the `static` modifier
have been applied to.
Let's build on top of our previous example:

[source,java]
----
class Payment {
    static int MAX = 1000;

    static boolean isValidTransactionAmount(int amount) {
        return amount > 0 && amount <= MAX;
    }
}
----

Here we've declared a method `isValidTransactionAmount` which is static,
that's it, we don't need an object of type `Payment` to use it.
For example, this is how we'd call it:

[source,java]
----
public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println(Payment.isValidTransactionAmount(20));   // prints true
    }
}
----

Again, static methods involve a static context
from where we don't have access to constructs that refer to the current object,
such as instance fields, the `this` keyword, or the `super` keyword.
That's only expected.

Static fields and methods are constructed when the class is initialized,
not when class instances are constructed, so there's no way to access those instance constructs.

=== Static initializers

Static initializers are almost the same as instance initializers from a syntax perspective.
For example, building on top of the previous example, we could initialize the `MAX` variable like this:

[source,java]
----
class Payment {
    static int MAX;

    static {
        MAX = 1000;
    }
}
----

This construct is useful when the initialization of a static variable is not simple enough to fit in one line.
In this example, it's not worth it, but there are real-world scenarios where there's some complex logic we want to
execute when the class is constructed.

However, this construct should be used carefully because sometimes it's not easy to reason about the logic being
implemented.
That's because the field declaration and the actual initialization are separated.

The same rules about accessing constructs that refer to the current object apply here.

Additionally, there are a few notes we should remember about static initializers
(https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se21/html/jls-8.html#jls-8.7[&sect;8.7^]):

. It's a compile-time error if a static initializer can't complete normally.
. It's a compile-time error if a `return` statement appears anywhere within a static initializer.
. For more complex use cases, there are also some exhaustive
https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se21/html/jls-8.html#jls-8.3.3[definitions^] that you should be aware of.

=== Static imports

Static imports
(https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se21/html/jls-7.html#jls-7.5.3[&sect;7.5.3^])
are used to import static-accessible members from other types, such as classes,
into a given type, for example, another class.

It works by specifying the `static` keyword after the `import` keyword.
For example, let's suppose we have the following `Payment` class, located in a package named `com.payment`.

[source,java]
----
package com.payment;

public class Payment {
    public static int MAX = 1000;
}
----

If we have another class called `Service` in a package called `com.services` and we want to import statically,
the `MAX` static field from `Payment`, we could do so like this:

[source,java]
----
package com.services;

import static com.payment.Payment.MAX;

class Service {
    static {
        System.out.println(MAX);
    }
}
----

It also works for the wildcard (`*`) import. This one would import _all_ static members of `Payment`.

[source,java]
----
import static com.payment.Payment.*;
----

The alternative to this import is the regular import:

[source,java]
----
package com.services;

import com.payment.Payment;

class Service {
    static {
        System.out.println(Payment.MAX);
    }
}
----

== Final thoughts

Static constructs offer us the flexibility to go beyond simple object-oriented programming (OOP) designs.
With it, we can implement our solutions following a different approach in many cases, including some
functional-programming style.

From declaring simple constant fields to building https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pure_function[pure functions^],
the `static` keyword brings to the Java world the necessary power to be more than just an OOP language.
This may seems superfluous, but given the wide adoption Java has had, it's important to keep the language and
platform flexible enough to meet different use cases.

Hopefully, the insights and links shared here are a good reference and a starting point for you to dig deeper
into the intricacies and use cases of the `static` keyword and its constructs, to bring their benefits to your
daily coding job; and, as always, be aware of possible pitfalls while using it.
