src/main/resources/content/notes/2024/building-event-driven-microservices.adoc, before:

= Building Event-Driven Microservices
Asiel Leal_Celdeiro
2024-02-24
:docinfo: shared-footer
:icons: font
:toc-title: In this book
:toc: left
:jbake-document_info: shared-footer
:jbake-table_of_content: left
:jbake-fontawesome: true
:jbake-type: booknote
:jbake-status: published
:jbake-tags: java, microservices
:jbake-read: progress
:jbake-summary: "Building Event-Driven Microservices is an invaluable source of knowledge to those interested in \
event-driven systems".
:jbake-book_authors: Adam Bellemare
:jbake-publisher: O'Reilly Media, Inc.
:jbake-published: August 2020
:jbake-amazon_link: https://amzn.to/3xEFlvk
:jbake-orreilly_link: https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/building-event-driven-microservices/9781492057888/
:jbake-appendix_to_title_text: by Adam Bellemare
:jbake-og_img: notes/2024/images/building-event-driven-microservices.webp
:jbake-image_src: notes/2024/images/building-event-driven-microservices.webp
:jbake-image_alt: Image of the book cover: Building Event-Driven Microservices
:jbake-og_author: Asiel Leal Celdeiro
:jbake-author_handle: lealceldeiro
:jbake-author_profile_image: /img/author/lealceldeiro.webp

== Chapter 1: Why Event-Driven Microservices

Domain: The problem space that a business occupies and provides solutions to.
This encompasses everything that the business must contend with, including rules, processes, ideas,
business-specific terminology, and anything related to its problem space,
regardless of whether or not the business concerns itself with it.
The domain exists regardless of the existence of the business.

Domain (and subdomain) model: An abstraction of the actual domain useful for business purposes.
The main domain model of ana business is discernible through the products the business provides its customers,
the interfaces by which customers interact with the products, and the various other processes and functions by
which the business fulfills its stated goals.

By keeping loose coupling between bounded contexts, and focusing on minimizing inter-context dependencies,
we allow bounded context implementations to change as necessary,
without subsequently breaking many (or any) other systems.

Teams that find it too hard to access data in their organization,
or find their products are scope-creeping because all the data is located in a single implementation,
are likely experiencing the effects of poor data communication structures.
This problem will be magnified as the organization grows, develops new products,
and increasingly needs to access commonly used domain data.

One of the tenets of event-driven microservices is that core business data should be easy to obtain
and usable by any service that requires it.
This replaces the ad hoc data communication structure in this scenario with a formalized data communication structure.
Such a data communication structure could remove most of the difficulties of collecting data from other systems.

== Chapter 2: Event-Driven Microservice Fundamentals

== Chapter 3: Communication and Data Contracts

== Chapter 4: Integrating Event-Driven Architectures with Existing Systems

== Chapter 5: Event-Driven Processing Basics

== Chapter 6: Deterministic Stream Processing

== Chapter 7: Stateful Streaming

== Chapter 8: Building Workflows with Microservices

== Chapter 9: Microservices Using Function-as-a-Service

== Chapter 10: Basic Producer and Consumer Microservices

== Chapter 11: Heavyweight Framework Microservices

== Chapter 12: Lightweight Framework Microservices

== Chapter 13: Integrating Event-Driven and Request-Response Microservices

== Chapter 14: Supportive Tooling

== Chapter 15: Testing Event-Driven Microservices

== Chapter 16: Deploying Event-Driven Microservices

== Chapter 17: Conclusion

Commit message:

Add final notes from chapter 1

src/main/resources/content/notes/2024/building-event-driven-microservices.adoc, after:

= Building Event-Driven Microservices
Asiel Leal_Celdeiro
2024-02-24
:docinfo: shared-footer
:icons: font
:toc-title: In this book
:toc: left
:jbake-document_info: shared-footer
:jbake-table_of_content: left
:jbake-fontawesome: true
:jbake-type: booknote
:jbake-status: published
:jbake-tags: java, microservices
:jbake-read: progress
:jbake-summary: "Building Event-Driven Microservices is an invaluable source of knowledge to those interested in \
event-driven systems".
:jbake-book_authors: Adam Bellemare
:jbake-publisher: O'Reilly Media, Inc.
:jbake-published: August 2020
:jbake-amazon_link: https://amzn.to/3xEFlvk
:jbake-orreilly_link: https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/building-event-driven-microservices/9781492057888/
:jbake-appendix_to_title_text: by Adam Bellemare
:jbake-og_img: notes/2024/images/building-event-driven-microservices.webp
:jbake-image_src: notes/2024/images/building-event-driven-microservices.webp
:jbake-image_alt: Image of the book cover: Building Event-Driven Microservices
:jbake-og_author: Asiel Leal Celdeiro
:jbake-author_handle: lealceldeiro
:jbake-author_profile_image: /img/author/lealceldeiro.webp

== Chapter 1: Why Event-Driven Microservices

Domain: The problem space that a business occupies and provides solutions to.
This encompasses everything that the business must contend with, including rules, processes, ideas,
business-specific terminology, and anything related to its problem space,
regardless of whether or not the business concerns itself with it.
The domain exists regardless of the existence of the business.

Domain (and subdomain) model: An abstraction of the actual domain useful for business purposes.
The main domain model of ana business is discernible through the products the business provides its customers,
the interfaces by which customers interact with the products, and the various other processes and functions by
which the business fulfills its stated goals.

By keeping loose coupling between bounded contexts, and focusing on minimizing inter-context dependencies,
we allow bounded context implementations to change as necessary,
without subsequently breaking many (or any) other systems.

Teams that find it too hard to access data in their organization,
or find their products are scope-creeping because all the data is located in a single implementation,
are likely experiencing the effects of poor data communication structures.
This problem will be magnified as the organization grows, develops new products,
and increasingly needs to access commonly used domain data.

One of the tenets of event-driven microservices is that core business data should be easy to obtain
and usable by any service that requires it.
This replaces the ad hoc data communication structure in this scenario with a formalized data communication structure.
Such a data communication structure could remove most of the difficulties of collecting data from other systems.

The event-driven data communication approach offers an alternative
to the traditional behavior of implementation and data communication structures.
It's not a replacement, but rather a different solution to the tradition request-response approach used
by many systems until now.

An event-streaming data communication structure decouples the production and ownership of data from the access to it.

In this paradigm, events are the basis of communication.

Some benefits of using event-driven microservices:

- Granularity: Services map neatly to bounded contexts and can be easily rewritten when business requirements change.
- Scalability: Individual services can be scaled up and down as needed.
- Technological flexibility: Services use the most appropriate languages and technologies.
This also allows for easy prototyping using pioneering technology.
- Business requirement flexibility: Ownership of granular microservices is easy to reorganize.
There are fewer cross-team dependencies compared to large services,
and the organization can react more quickly to changes in business requirements.
- Continuous delivery support: It's easy to ship a small, modular microservice, and roll it back if needed.
- High testability: Microservices tend to have fewer dependencies than large monoliths,
making it easier to mock out the required testing endpoints and ensure proper code coverage.

== Chapter 2: Event-Driven Microservice Fundamentals

== Chapter 3: Communication and Data Contracts

== Chapter 4: Integrating Event-Driven Architectures with Existing Systems

== Chapter 5: Event-Driven Processing Basics

== Chapter 6: Deterministic Stream Processing

== Chapter 7: Stateful Streaming

== Chapter 8: Building Workflows with Microservices

== Chapter 9: Microservices Using Function-as-a-Service

== Chapter 10: Basic Producer and Consumer Microservices

== Chapter 11: Heavyweight Framework Microservices

== Chapter 12: Lightweight Framework Microservices

== Chapter 13: Integrating Event-Driven and Request-Response Microservices

== Chapter 14: Supportive Tooling

== Chapter 15: Testing Event-Driven Microservices

== Chapter 16: Deploying Event-Driven Microservices

== Chapter 17: Conclusion
