src/main/resources/content/notes/2024/restful-java-with-jax-rs-2-0.adoc, before:

= RESTful Java with JAX-RS 2.0, 2nd Edition
Asiel Leal_Celdeiro
2024-02-01
:jbake-type: booknote
:jbake-status: published
:jbake-tags: java, jax-rs, webservice
:jbake-read: progress
:jbake-summary: Recommended by the official docs from https://resteasy.dev/books, "RESTful Java with JAX-RS 2.0" is \
an excellent guide to start building RESTful services in Java.
:jbake-authors: Bill Burke
:jbake-publisher: O'Reilly Media, Inc.
:jbake-published: November 2013
:jbake-amazon_link: https://a.co/d/15qvYGA
:jbake-orreilly_link: https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/restful-java-with/9781449361433/
:jbake-og_img: notes/2024/images/restful-java-with-jax-rs-2-0.jpg
:jbake-image_src: notes/2024/images/restful-java-with-jax-rs-2-0.jpg
:jbake-image_alt: Image of the book cover: RESTful Java with JAX-RS 2.0, 2nd Edition
:jbake-og_author: Asiel Leal Celdeiro
:jbake-author_handle: lealceldeiro
:jbake-author_profile_image: /img/author/lealceldeiro.png

Main notes taken from the book https://a.co/d/15qvYGA["RESTful Java with JAX-RS 2.0, Second Edition"^]
by Bill Burke.
Copyright 2014 Bill Burke, 978-1-449-36134-1

Source code at: https://github.com/oreillymedia/restful_java_jax-rs_2_0

_Note: As this is rather an old book, it's advisable to always verify if there are newer, more modern alternatives for solutions explained here; for instance, when Java clients or options to secure Java application are mentioned._

'''

Java API for RESTful web services (JAX-RS) aims to make development of RESTful web services in Java simple and
intuitive.

== Chapter 1: Introduction to REST

Architectural principles of the REpresentational State Transfer (REST):

* Addressable resources
* A uniform, constrained interface
* Representation-oriented
* Communicate statelessly
* Hypermedia As The Engine Of Application State (HATEOAS)

Example of an HTTP request performed by the browser:

[source,console]
----
GET /resteasy HTTP/1.1
Host: jboss.org
User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0
Accept: text/html,application/xhtml+xml,application/xml;q=0.9,*/*;q=0.8
Accept-Language:
en-us,en;q=0.5
Accept-Encoding:
gzip,deflate
----

To the previous request the response could be:

[source,console]
----
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
X-Powered-By: Servlet 2.4; JBoss-4.2.2.GA
Content-Type: text/html
<head>
<title>JBoss RESTEasy Project</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>JBoss RESTEasy</h1>
<p>JBoss RESTEasy is an open source implementation of the JAX-RS specification...
----

URI characters are encoded following these rules:

* The characters `a-z`, `A-Z`, `0-9`, `.`, `-`, `*`, and `_` remain the same
* The space character is converted to `+`
* The other characters are first converted into a sequence of bytes using a specific encoding scheme.
Next, a two-digit hexadecimal number prefixed by `%` represents each byte

`GET` is a read-only operation.
It is used to query the server for specific information.
It is both an idempotent and safe operation.

`PUT` requests that the server store the message body sent with the request under the location provided in the HTTP
message.
It is usually modeled as an insert or update and it's also idempotent.

`DELETE` is used to remove resources.
It is idempotent as well.

`POST` is non-idempotent and unsafe operation.
Each POST method is allowed to modify the service in a unique way.
We may or may not send information with the request.
We may or may not receive information from the response.

`HEAD` is exactly like `GET` except that instead of returning a response body, it returns only a response code and
any headers associated with the request.

`OPTIONS` is used to request information about the communication options of the resource we're interested in.
It allows the client to determine the capabilities of a server and a resource without triggering any resource action
or retrieval.

In a RESTful system, the complexity of the client-server interaction is within the representations being passed
back and forth.
These representations could be XML, JSON, YAML, or any other format designed for this purpose.

HTTP uses the `Content-Type` header to tell the client or server what data format it is receiving.
Its value string is in the Multipurpose Internet Mail Extension (MIME) format.
The MIME format is basic: `type/subtype;name=value;name=value...`.
For example:

[source,console]
----
text/plain
text/html
application/xml
text/html; charset=iso-8859-1
----

== Chapter 2: Designing RESTful Services

== Chapter 3: Your First JAX-RS Service

== Chapter 4: HTTP Method and URI Matching

== Chapter 5: JAX-RS Injection

== Chapter 6: JAX-RS Content Handlers

== Chapter 7: Server Responses and Exception Handling

== Chapter 8: JAX-RS Client API

== Chapter 9: HTTP Content Negotiation

== Chapter 10: HATEOAS

== Chapter 11: Scaling JAX-RS Applications

== Chapter 12: Filters and Interceptors

== Chapter 13: Asynchronous JAX-RS

== Chapter 14: Deployment and Integration

== Chapter 15: Securing JAX-RS

== Chapter 16: Alternative Java Clients

Commit message:

note: Notes on chapter 2 of restful-java-with-jax-rs-2-0.adoc

src/main/resources/content/notes/2024/restful-java-with-jax-rs-2-0.adoc, after:

= RESTful Java with JAX-RS 2.0, 2nd Edition
Asiel Leal_Celdeiro
2024-02-01
:jbake-type: booknote
:jbake-status: published
:jbake-tags: java, jax-rs, webservice
:jbake-read: progress
:jbake-summary: Recommended by the official docs from https://resteasy.dev/books, "RESTful Java with JAX-RS 2.0" is \
an excellent guide to start building RESTful services in Java.
:jbake-authors: Bill Burke
:jbake-publisher: O'Reilly Media, Inc.
:jbake-published: November 2013
:jbake-amazon_link: https://a.co/d/15qvYGA
:jbake-orreilly_link: https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/restful-java-with/9781449361433/
:jbake-og_img: notes/2024/images/restful-java-with-jax-rs-2-0.jpg
:jbake-image_src: notes/2024/images/restful-java-with-jax-rs-2-0.jpg
:jbake-image_alt: Image of the book cover: RESTful Java with JAX-RS 2.0, 2nd Edition
:jbake-og_author: Asiel Leal Celdeiro
:jbake-author_handle: lealceldeiro
:jbake-author_profile_image: /img/author/lealceldeiro.png

Main notes taken from the book https://a.co/d/15qvYGA["RESTful Java with JAX-RS 2.0, Second Edition"^]
by Bill Burke.
Copyright 2014 Bill Burke, 978-1-449-36134-1

Source code at: https://github.com/oreillymedia/restful_java_jax-rs_2_0

_Note: As this is rather an old book, it's advisable to always verify if there are newer, more modern alternatives for solutions explained here; for instance, when Java clients or options to secure Java application are mentioned._

'''

Java API for RESTful web services (JAX-RS) aims to make development of RESTful web services in Java simple and
intuitive.

== Chapter 1: Introduction to REST

Architectural principles of the REpresentational State Transfer (REST):

* Addressable resources
* A uniform, constrained interface
* Representation-oriented
* Communicate statelessly
* Hypermedia As The Engine Of Application State (HATEOAS)

Example of an HTTP request performed by the browser:

[source,console]
----
GET /resteasy HTTP/1.1
Host: jboss.org
User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0
Accept: text/html,application/xhtml+xml,application/xml;q=0.9,*/*;q=0.8
Accept-Language:
en-us,en;q=0.5
Accept-Encoding:
gzip,deflate
----

To the previous request the response could be:

[source,console]
----
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
X-Powered-By: Servlet 2.4; JBoss-4.2.2.GA
Content-Type: text/html
<head>
<title>JBoss RESTEasy Project</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>JBoss RESTEasy</h1>
<p>JBoss RESTEasy is an open source implementation of the JAX-RS specification...
----

URI characters are encoded following these rules:

* The characters `a-z`, `A-Z`, `0-9`, `.`, `-`, `*`, and `_` remain the same
* The space character is converted to `+`
* The other characters are first converted into a sequence of bytes using a specific encoding scheme.
Next, a two-digit hexadecimal number prefixed by `%` represents each byte

`GET` is a read-only operation.
It is used to query the server for specific information.
It is both an idempotent and safe operation.

`PUT` requests that the server store the message body sent with the request under the location provided in the HTTP
message.
It is usually modeled as an insert or update and it's also idempotent.

`DELETE` is used to remove resources.
It is idempotent as well.

`POST` is non-idempotent and unsafe operation.
Each POST method is allowed to modify the service in a unique way.
We may or may not send information with the request.
We may or may not receive information from the response.

`HEAD` is exactly like `GET` except that instead of returning a response body, it returns only a response code and
any headers associated with the request.

`OPTIONS` is used to request information about the communication options of the resource we're interested in.
It allows the client to determine the capabilities of a server and a resource without triggering any resource action
or retrieval.

In a RESTful system, the complexity of the client-server interaction is within the representations being passed
back and forth.
These representations could be XML, JSON, YAML, or any other format designed for this purpose.

HTTP uses the `Content-Type` header to tell the client or server what data format it is receiving.
Its value string is in the Multipurpose Internet Mail Extension (MIME) format.
The MIME format is basic: `type/subtype;name=value;name=value...`.
For example:

[source,console]
----
text/plain
text/html
application/xml
text/html; charset=iso-8859-1
----

== Chapter 2: Designing RESTful Services

`PUT` and `POST` are required by their specification to send a response code of 201, “Created,” if a new resource was
created on the server as a result of the request.

The `Location` header in the response message provides a URI to the client for a created resource,
so it knows where to further interact with the resource that was just created
(i.e., if the client wanted to update the resource).

For `DELETE`, the HTTP specification requires that we send a response code of `200 OK`,
and a response message body or a response code of `204 No Content`, without any response body.

== Chapter 3: Your First JAX-RS Service

== Chapter 4: HTTP Method and URI Matching

== Chapter 5: JAX-RS Injection

== Chapter 6: JAX-RS Content Handlers

== Chapter 7: Server Responses and Exception Handling

== Chapter 8: JAX-RS Client API

== Chapter 9: HTTP Content Negotiation

== Chapter 10: HATEOAS

== Chapter 11: Scaling JAX-RS Applications

== Chapter 12: Filters and Interceptors

== Chapter 13: Asynchronous JAX-RS

== Chapter 14: Deployment and Integration

== Chapter 15: Securing JAX-RS

== Chapter 16: Alternative Java Clients
